Introduction
This is a modiﬁed version of a talk I delivered in December 2012 at
TEDxEuston, a yearly conference focused on Africa. Speakers from diverse
ﬁelds deliver concise talks aimed at challenging and inspiring Africans and
friends of Africa. I had spoken at a different TED conference a few years
before, giving a talk titled ‘The Danger of the Single Story’ about how
stereotypes limit and shape our thinking, especially about Africa. It seems
to me that the word feminist, and the idea of feminism itself, is also limited
by stereotypes. When my brother Chuks and best friend Ike, both coorganizers of the TEDxEuston conference, insisted that I speak, I could not
say no. I decided to speak about feminism because it is something I feel
strongly about. I suspected that it might not be a very popular subject, but I
hoped to start a necessary conversation. And so that evening as I stood
onstage, I felt as though I was in the presence of family – a kind and
attentive audience, but one that might resist the subject of my talk. At the
end, their standing ovation gave me hope.

We Should All Be Feminists
Okoloma was one of my greatest childhood friends. He lived on my street
and looked after me like a big brother: if I liked a boy, I would ask
Okoloma’s opinion. Okoloma was funny and intelligent and wore cowboy
boots that were pointy at the tips. In December 2005, in a plane crash in
southern Nigeria, Okoloma died. It is still hard for me to put into words
how I felt. Okoloma was a person I could argue with, laugh with and truly
talk to. He was also the ﬁrst person to call me a feminist.
I was about fourteen. We were in his house, arguing, both of us bristling
with half-baked knowledge from the books we had read. I don’t remember
what this particular argument was about. But I remember that as I argued
and argued, Okoloma looked at me and said, ‘You know, you’re a feminist.’
It was not a compliment. I could tell from his tone – the same tone with
which a person would say, ‘You’re a supporter of terrorism.’
I did not know exactly what this word feminist meant. And I did not want
Okoloma to know that I didn’t know. So I brushed it aside and continued to
argue. The ﬁrst thing I planned to do when I got home was look up the word
in the dictionary.

Now fast-forward to some years later.

In 2003, I wrote a novel called Purple Hibiscus, about a man who, among
other things, beats his wife, and whose story doesn’t end too well. While I
was promoting the novel in Nigeria, a journalist, a nice, well-meaning man,
told me he wanted to advise me. (Nigerians, as you might know, are very
quick to give unsolicited advice.)
He told me that people were saying my novel was feminist, and his
advice to me – he was shaking his head sadly as he spoke – was that I
should never call myself a feminist, since feminists are women who are
unhappy because they cannot ﬁnd husbands.
So I decided to call myself a Happy Feminist.
Then an academic, a Nigerian woman, told me that feminism was not our
culture, that feminism was un-African, and I was only calling myself a
feminist because I had been inﬂuenced by Western books. (Which amused
me, because much of my early reading was decidedly unfeminist: I must
have read every single Mills & Boon romance published before I was
sixteen. And each time I try to read those books called ‘classic feminist
texts’, I get bored, and I struggle to ﬁnish them.)
Anyway, since feminism was un-African, I decided I would now call
myself a Happy African Feminist. Then a dear friend told me that calling
myself a feminist meant that I hated men. So I decided I would now be a
Happy African Feminist Who Does Not Hate Men. At some point I was a
Happy African Feminist Who Does Not Hate Men And Who Likes To Wear
Lip Gloss And High Heels For Herself And Not For Men.
Of course much of this was tongue-in-cheek, but what it shows is how
that word feminist is so heavy with baggage, negative baggage: you hate
men, you hate bras, you hate African culture, you think women should
always be in charge, you don’t wear make-up, you don’t shave, you’re
always angry, you don’t have a sense of humour, you don’t use deodorant.

Now here’s a story from my childhood.
When I was in primary school in Nsukka, a university town in southeastern Nigeria, my teacher said at the beginning of term that she would
give the class a test and whoever got the highest score would be the class
monitor. Class monitor was a big deal. If you were class monitor, you
would write down the names of noise-makers each day, which was heady
enough power on its own, but my teacher would also give you a cane to
hold in your hand while you walked around and patrolled the class for
noise-makers. Of course, you were not allowed to actually use the cane. But
it was an exciting prospect for the nine-year-old me. I very much wanted to
be class monitor. And I got the highest score on the test.
Then, to my surprise, my teacher said the monitor had to be a boy. She
had forgotten to make that clear earlier; she assumed it was obvious. A boy
had the second-highest score on the test. And he would be monitor.
What was even more interesting is that this boy was a sweet, gentle soul
who had no interest in patrolling the class with a stick. While I was full of
ambition to do so.
But I was female and he was male and he became class monitor.
I have never forgotten that incident.
If we do something over and over again, it becomes normal. If we see the
same thing over and over again, it becomes normal. If only boys are made
class monitor, then at some point we will all think, even if unconsciously,
that the class monitor has to be a boy. If we keep seeing only men as heads
of corporations, it starts to seem ‘natural’ that only men should be heads of
corporations.

I often make the mistake of thinking that something that is obvious to me is
just as obvious to everyone else. Take my dear friend Louis, who is a
brilliant, progressive man. We would have conversations and he would tell
me, ‘I don’t see what you mean by things being different and harder for
women. Maybe it was so in the past, but not now. Everything is ﬁne now for
women.’ I didn’t understand how Louis could not see what seemed so
evident.
I love being back home in Nigeria, and spend much of my time there in
Lagos, the largest city and commercial hub of the country. Sometimes, in
the evenings when the heat goes down and the city has a slower pace, I go
out with friends and family to restaurants or cafés. On one of those
evenings, Louis and I were out with friends.
There is a wonderful ﬁxture in Lagos: a sprinkling of energetic young
men who hang around outside certain establishments and very dramatically
‘help’ you park your car. Lagos is a metropolis of almost twenty million
people, with more energy than London, more entrepreneurial spirit than
New York, and so people come up with all sorts of ways to make a living.
As in most big cities, ﬁnding parking in the evenings can be difﬁcult, so
these young men make a business out of ﬁnding spots and – even when
there are spots available – of guiding you into yours with much
gesticulating, and promising to ‘look after’ your car until you get back. I
was impressed with the particular theatrics of the man who found us a
parking spot that evening. And so as we were leaving, I decided to give him
a tip. I opened my bag, put my hand inside my bag to get my money, and I
gave it to the man. And he, this man who was happy and grateful, took the

money from me, and then looked across at Louis and said, ‘Thank you,
sah!’
Louis looked at me, surprised, and asked, ‘Why is he thanking me? I
didn’t give him the money.’ Then I saw realization dawn on Louis’s face.
The man believed that whatever money I had ultimately came from Louis.
Because Louis is a man.

Men and women are different. We have different hormones and different
sexual organs and different biological abilities – women can have babies,
men cannot. Men have more testosterone and are, in general, physically
stronger than women. There are slightly more women than men in the world
– 52 per cent of the world’s population is female but most of the positions
of power and prestige are occupied by men. The late Kenyan Nobel peace
laureate Wangari Maathai put it simply and well when she said, ‘The higher
you go, the fewer women there are.’
In the recent US elections, we kept hearing of the Lilly Ledbetter law,
and if we go beyond that nicely alliterative name, it was really about this: in
the US, a man and a woman are doing the same job, with the same
qualiﬁcations, and the man is paid more because he is a man.
So in a literal way, men rule the world. This made sense – a thousand
years ago. Because human beings lived then in a world in which physical
strength was the most important attribute for survival; the physically
stronger person was more likely to lead. And men in general are physically
stronger. (There are of course many exceptions.) Today, we live in a vastly
different world. The person more qualiﬁed to lead is not the physically
stronger person. It is the more intelligent, the more knowledgeable, the
more creative, more innovative. And there are no hormones for those

attributes. A man is as likely as a woman to be intelligent, innovative,
creative. We have evolved. But our ideas of gender have not evolved very
much.

Not long ago, I walked into the lobby of one of the best Nigerian hotels, and
a guard at the entrance stopped me and asked me annoying questions –
What was the name and room number of the person I was visiting? Did I
know this person? Could I prove that I was a hotel guest by showing him
my key card? – because the automatic assumption is that a Nigerian female
walking into a hotel alone is a sex worker. Because a Nigerian female alone
cannot possibly be a guest paying for her own room. A man who walks into
the same hotel is not harassed. The assumption is that he is there for
something legitimate. (Why, by the way, do those hotels not focus on the
demand for sex workers instead of on the ostensible supply?)
In Lagos, I cannot go alone into many reputable clubs and bars. They just
don’t let you in if you are a woman alone. You must be accompanied by a
man. And so I have male friends who arrive at clubs and end up going in
with their arms linked with those of a complete stranger, because that
complete stranger, a woman out on her own, had no choice but to ask for
‘help’ to get into the club.
Each time I walk into a Nigerian restaurant with a man, the waiter greets
the man and ignores me. The waiters are products of a society that has
taught them that men are more important than women, and I know that they
don’t intend harm, but it is one thing to know something intellectually and
quite another to feel it emotionally. Each time they ignore me, I feel
invisible. I feel upset. I want to tell them that I am just as human as the man,

just as worthy of acknowledgement. These are little things, but sometimes it
is the little things that sting the most.
Not long ago, I wrote an article about being young and female in Lagos.
And an acquaintance told me that it was an angry article, and I should not
have made it so angry. But I was unapologetic. Of course it was angry.
Gender as it functions today is a grave injustice. I am angry. We should all
be angry. Anger has a long history of bringing about positive change. But I
am also hopeful, because I believe deeply in the ability of human beings to
remake themselves for the better.
But back to anger. I heard the caution in the acquaintance’s tone, and I
knew that the comment was as much about the article as it was about my
character. Anger, the tone said, is particularly not good for a woman. If you
are a woman, you are not supposed to express anger, because it is
threatening. I have a friend, an American woman, who took over a
managerial position from a man. Her predecessor had been considered a
‘tough go-getter’; he was blunt and hard-charging and was particularly
strict about the signing of time sheets. She took on her new job, and
imagined herself equally tough, but perhaps a little kinder than him – he
didn’t always realize that people had families, she said, and she did. Only
weeks into her new job, she disciplined an employee about a forgery on a
time sheet, just as her predecessor would have done. The employee then
complained to top management about her style. She was aggressive and
difﬁcult to work with, the employee said. Other employees agreed. One said
they had expected that she would bring a ‘woman’s touch’ to her job, but
she hadn’t.
It didn’t occur to any of them that she was doing the same thing for
which a man had been praised.
I have another friend, also an American woman, who has a high-paying
job in advertising. She is one of two women in her team. Once, at a

meeting, she said she had felt slighted by her boss, who had ignored her
comments and then praised something similar when it came from a man.
She wanted to speak up, to challenge her boss. But she didn’t. Instead, after
the meeting, she went to the bathroom and cried, then called me to vent
about it. She didn’t want to speak up because she didn’t want to seem
aggressive. She let her resentments simmer.
What struck me – with her and with many other female American friends
I have – is how invested they are in being ‘liked’. How they have been
raised to believe that their being likeable is very important and that this
‘likeable’ trait is a speciﬁc thing. And that speciﬁc thing does not include
showing anger or being aggressive or disagreeing too loudly.
We spend too much time teaching girls to worry about what boys think of
them. But the reverse is not the case. We don’t teach boys to care about
being likeable. We spend too much time telling girls that they cannot be
angry or aggressive or tough, which is bad enough, but then we turn around
and either praise or excuse men for the same reasons. All over the world,
there are so many magazine articles and books telling women what to do,
how to be and not to be, in order to attract or please men. There are far
fewer guides for men about pleasing women.
I teach a writing workshop in Lagos and one of the participants, a young
woman, told me that a friend had told her not to listen to my ‘feminist talk’;
otherwise she would absorb ideas that would destroy her marriage. This is a
threat – the destruction of a marriage, the possibility of not having a
marriage at all – that in our society is much more likely to be used against a
woman than against a man.
Gender matters everywhere in the world. And I would like today to ask
that we should begin to dream about and plan for a different world. A fairer
world. A world of happier men and happier women who are truer to

themselves. And this is how to start: we must raise our daughters
differently. We must also raise our sons differently.

We do a great disservice to boys in how we raise them. We stiﬂe the
humanity of boys. We deﬁne masculinity in a very narrow way. Masculinity
is a hard, small cage, and we put boys inside this cage.
We teach boys to be afraid of fear, of weakness, of vulnerability. We
teach them to mask their true selves, because they have to be, in Nigerianspeak, a hard man.
In secondary school, a boy and a girl go out, both of them teenagers with
meagre pocket money. Yet the boy is expected to pay the bills, always, to
prove his masculinity. (And we wonder why boys are more likely to steal
money from their parents.)
What if both boys and girls were raised not to link masculinity and
money? What if their attitude was not ‘the boy has to pay’, but rather,
‘whoever has more should pay’? Of course, because of their historical
advantage, it is mostly men who will have more today. But if we start
raising children differently, then in ﬁfty years, in a hundred years, boys will
no longer have the pressure of proving their masculinity by material means.
But by far the worst thing we do to males – by making them feel they
have to be hard – is that we leave them with very fragile egos. The harder a
man feels compelled to be, the weaker his ego is.
And then we do a much greater disservice to girls, because we raise them
to cater to the fragile egos of males.
We teach girls to shrink themselves, to make themselves smaller.
We say to girls, ‘You can have ambition, but not too much. You should
aim to be successful but not too successful, otherwise you will threaten the

man. If you are the breadwinner in your relationship with a man, pretend
that you are not, especially in public, otherwise you will emasculate him.’
But what if we question the premise itself? Why should a woman’s
success be a threat to a man? What if we decide to simply dispose of that
word – and I don’t know if there is an English word I dislike more than this
– emasculation.
A Nigerian acquaintance once asked me if I was worried that men would
be intimidated by me.
I was not worried at all – it had not even occurred to me to be worried,
because a man who would be intimidated by me is exactly the kind of man I
would have no interest in.
Still, I was struck by this. Because I am female, I’m expected to aspire to
marriage. I am expected to make my life choices always keeping in mind
that marriage is the most important. Marriage can be a good thing, a source
of joy, love and mutual support. But why do we teach girls to aspire to
marriage, yet we don’t teach boys to do the same?
I know a Nigerian woman who decided to sell her house because she
didn’t want to intimidate a man who might want to marry her.
I know an unmarried woman in Nigeria who, when she goes to
conferences, wears a wedding ring because she wants her colleagues to –
according to her – ‘give her respect’.
The sadness in this is that a wedding ring will indeed automatically make
her seem worthy of respect, while not wearing a wedding ring would make
her easily dismissible – and this is in a modern workplace.
I know young women who are under so much pressure – from family,
from friends, even from work – to get married that they are pushed to make
terrible choices.
Our society teaches a woman at a certain age who is unmarried to see it
as a deep personal failure. While a man at a certain age who is unmarried

has not quite come around to making his pick.
It is easy to say, ‘But women can just say no to all this.’ But the reality is
more difﬁcult, more complex. We are all social beings. We internalize ideas
from our socialization.
Even the language we use illustrates this. The language of marriage is
often a language of ownership, not a language of partnership.
We use the word respect for something a woman shows a man, but not
often for something a man shows a woman.
Both men and women will say, ‘I did it for peace in my marriage.’
When men say it, it is usually about something they should not be doing
anyway. Something they say to their friends in a fondly exasperated way,
something that ultimately proves to them their masculinity – ‘Oh, my wife
said I can’t go to clubs every night, so now, for peace in my marriage, I go
only on weekends.’
When women say ‘I did it for peace in my marriage,’ it is usually
because they have given up a job, a career goal, a dream.
We teach females that in relationships, compromise is what a woman is
more likely to do.
We raise girls to see each other as competitors – not for jobs or
accomplishments, which in my opinion can be a good thing, but for the
attention of men.
We teach girls that they cannot be sexual beings in the way boys are. If
we have sons, we don’t mind knowing about their girlfriends. But our
daughters’ boyfriends? God forbid. (But we of course expect them to bring
home the perfect man for marriage when the time is right.)
We police girls. We praise girls for virginity but we don’t praise boys for
virginity (and it makes me wonder how exactly this is supposed to work
out, since the loss of virginity is a process that usually involves two people
of opposite genders).

Recently a young woman was gang-raped in a university in Nigeria, and
the response of many young Nigerians, both male and female, was
something like this: ‘Yes, rape is wrong, but what is a girl doing in a room
with four boys?’
Let us, if we can, forget the horrible inhumanity of that response. These
Nigerians have been raised to think of women as inherently guilty. And they
have been raised to expect so little of men that the idea of men as savage
beings with no self-control is somehow acceptable.
We teach girls shame. Close your legs. Cover yourself. We make them
feel as though by being born female, they are already guilty of something.
And so girls grow up to be women who cannot say they have desire. Who
silence themselves. Who cannot say what they truly think. Who have turned
pretence into an art form.
I know a woman who hates domestic work, but she pretends that she
likes it, because she has been taught that to be ‘good wife material’, she has
to be – to use that Nigerian word – homely. And then she got married. And
her husband’s family began to complain that she had changed. Actually, she
had not changed. She just got tired of pretending to be what she was not.
The problem with gender is that it prescribes how we should be rather
than recognizing how we are. Imagine how much happier we would be,
how much freer to be our true individual selves, if we didn’t have the
weight of gender expectations.

Boys and girls are undeniably different biologically, but socialization
exaggerates the differences, and then starts a self-fulﬁlling process. Take
cooking, for example. Today, women in general are more likely to do
housework than men – cooking and cleaning. But why is that? Is it because

women are born with a cooking gene or because over the years they have
been socialized to see cooking as their role? I was going to say that perhaps
women are born with a cooking gene until I remembered that the majority
of famous cooks in the world – who are given the fancy title of ‘chef’ – are
men.
I used to look at my grandmother, a brilliant woman, and wonder what
she would have been if she’d had the same opportunities as men during her
youth. Today, there are more opportunities for women than there were
during my grandmother’s time, because of changes in policy and law, which
are very important.
But what matters even more is our attitude, our mindset.
What if, in raising children, we focus on ability instead of gender? What
if we focus on interest instead of gender?

I know a family who has a son and a daughter, a year apart in age, both
brilliant at school. When the boy is hungry, the parents say to the girl, ‘Go
and cook Indomie noodles for your brother.’ The girl doesn’t like to cook
Indomie noodles, but she is a girl and she has to. What if the parents, from
the beginning, taught both children to cook them? Cooking, by the way, is a
useful and practical life skill for a boy to have. I’ve never thought it made
much sense to leave such a crucial thing – the ability to nourish oneself – in
the hands of others.
I know a woman who has the same degree and same job as her husband.
When they get back from work, she does most of the housework, which is
true for many marriages, but what struck me was that whenever he changed
the baby’s nappy, she said thank you to him. What if she saw it as
something normal and natural, that he should help care for his child?

I am trying to unlearn many lessons of gender I internalized while growing
up. But I sometimes still feel vulnerable in the face of gender expectations.
The ﬁrst time I taught a writing class in graduate school, I was worried.
Not about the teaching material, because I was well prepared and I was
teaching what I enjoyed. Instead I was worried about what to wear. I wanted
to be taken seriously.
I knew that because I was female, I would automatically have to prove
my worth. And I was worried that if I looked too feminine, I would not be
taken seriously. I really wanted to wear my shiny lip gloss and my girly
skirt, but I decided not to. I wore a very serious, very manly and very ugly
suit.
The sad truth of the matter is that when it comes to appearance, we start
off with men as the standard, as the norm. Many of us think that the less
feminine a woman appears, the more likely she is to be taken seriously. A
man going to a business meeting doesn’t wonder about being taken
seriously based on what he is wearing – but a woman does.
I wish I had not worn that ugly suit that day. Had I then the conﬁdence I
have now to be myself, my students would have beneﬁted even more from
my teaching. Because I would have been more comfortable and more fully
and truly myself.
I have chosen to no longer be apologetic for my femininity. And I want to
be respected in all my femaleness. Because I deserve to be. I like politics
and history and am happiest when having a good argument about ideas. I
am girly. I am happily girly. I like high heels and trying on lipsticks. It’s
nice to be complimented by both men and women (although I have to be
honest and say that I prefer the compliments of stylish women), but I often

wear clothes that men don’t like or don’t ‘understand’. I wear them because
I like them and because I feel good in them. The ‘male gaze’, as a shaper of
my life’s choices, is largely incidental.

Gender is not an easy conversation to have. It makes people uncomfortable,
sometimes even irritable. Both men and women are resistant to talk about
gender, or are quick to dismiss the problems of gender. Because thinking of
changing the status quo is always uncomfortable.
Some people ask, ‘Why the word feminist? Why not just say you are a
believer in human rights, or something like that?’ Because that would be
dishonest. Feminism is, of course, part of human rights in general – but to
choose to use the vague expression human rights is to deny the speciﬁc and
particular problem of gender. It would be a way of pretending that it was
not women who have, for centuries, been excluded. It would be a way of
denying that the problem of gender targets women. That the problem was
not about being human, but speciﬁcally about being a female human. For
centuries, the world divided human beings into two groups and then
proceeded to exclude and oppress one group. It is only fair that the solution
to the problem should acknowledge that.
Some men feel threatened by the idea of feminism. This comes, I think,
from the insecurity triggered by how boys are brought up, how their sense
of self-worth is diminished if they are not ‘naturally’ in charge as men.

Other men might respond by saying, ‘Okay, this is interesting, but I don’t
think like that. I don’t even think about gender.’
Maybe not.
And that is part of the problem. That many men do not actively think
about gender or notice gender. That many men say, like my friend Louis
did, that things might have been bad in the past but everything is ﬁne now.
And that many men do nothing to change it. If you are a man and you walk
into a restaurant and the waiter greets just you, does it occur to you to ask
the waiter, ‘Why have you not greeted her?’ Men need to speak out in all of
these ostensibly small situations.
Because gender can be uncomfortable, there are easy ways to close this
conversation.
Some people will bring up evolutionary biology and apes, how female
apes bow to male apes – that sort of thing. But the point is this: we are not
apes. Apes also live in trees and eat earthworms. We do not.
Some people will say, ‘Well, poor men also have a hard time.’ And they
do.
But that is not what this conversation is about. Gender and class are
different. Poor men still have the privileges of being men, even if they do
not have the privileges of being wealthy. I learned a lot about systems of
oppression and how they can be blind to one another by talking to black
men. I was once talking about gender and a man said to me, ‘Why does it
have to be you as a woman? Why not you as a human being?’ This type of
question is a way of silencing a person’s speciﬁc experiences. Of course I
am a human being, but there are particular things that happen to me in the
world because I am a woman. This same man, by the way, would often talk
about his experience as a black man. (To which I should probably have
responded, ‘Why not your experiences as a man or as a human being? Why
a black man?’)

So, no, this conversation is about gender. Some people will say, ‘Oh, but
women have the real power: bottom power.’ (This is a Nigerian expression
for a woman who uses her sexuality to get things from men.) But bottom
power is not power at all, because the woman with bottom power is actually
not powerful; she just has a good route to tap another person’s power. And
then what happens if the man is in a bad mood or sick or temporarily
impotent?
Some people will say a woman is subordinate to men because it’s our
culture. But culture is constantly changing. I have beautiful twin nieces who
are ﬁfteen. If they had been born a hundred years ago, they would have
been taken away and killed. Because a hundred years ago, Igbo culture
considered the birth of twins to be an evil omen. Today that practice is
unimaginable to all Igbo people.
What is the point of culture? Culture functions ultimately to ensure the
preservation and continuity of a people. In my family, I am the child who is
most interested in the story of who we are, in ancestral lands, in our
tradition. My brothers are not as interested as I am. But I cannot participate,
because Igbo culture privileges men, and only the male members of the
extended family can attend the meetings where major family decisions are
taken. So although I am the one who is most interested in these things, I
cannot attend the meeting. I cannot have a formal say. Because I am female.
Culture does not make people. People make culture. If it is true that the
full humanity of women is not our culture, then we can and must make it
our culture.

I think very often of my friend Okoloma. May he and others who passed
away in that Sosoliso crash continue to rest in peace. He will always be

remembered by those of us who loved him. And he was right, that day,
many years ago, when he called me a feminist. I am a feminist.
And when, all those years ago, I looked the word up in the dictionary, it
said: Feminist: a person who believes in the social, political and economic
equality of the sexes.
My great-grandmother, from stories I’ve heard, was a feminist. She ran
away from the house of the man she did not want to marry and married the
man of her choice. She refused, protested, spoke up whenever she felt she
was being deprived of land and access because she was female. She did not
know that word feminist. But it doesn’t mean she wasn’t one. More of us
should reclaim that word. The best feminist I know is my brother Kene,
who is also a kind, good-looking and very masculine young man. My own
deﬁnition of a feminist is a man or a woman who says, ‘Yes, there’s a
problem with gender as it is today and we must ﬁx it, we must do better.’
All of us, women and men, must do better.

